Blog: how we built an app server (from MVP to billions of events) (#4612)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server.md

    "url": "https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-hello-world-plugin",
    "description": "Greet the world with every PostHog event. An example plugin.",
    "main": "index.js",
    "config": [
        {
            "key": "greeting",
            "name": "What greeting would you like to use?",
            "type": "string",
            "default": "Hello world!",
            "required": false
        }
    ]
}
```

### App functions and processes

As you can see by reading the above examples, the index file exports functions that take objects PostHog provides (like configuration or event data). Specifically, our PostHog exports predefined functions that run on conditions like:

- event ingestion (`processEvent`)
    - useful for modifying incoming data, such as adding geographic data properties or dropping events matching a property filter.
- every minute, hour, day (`runEveryMinute`, `runEveryHour`, `runEveryDay`)
    - useful for triggering events based on updates to external services such as Stripe, HubSpot, or GitHub.
- once processing is complete (`exportEvents`, `onEvent`)
    - useful for exporting data to external services such as BigQuery, Snowflake, or Databricks.

> When users upload apps to PostHog, these we export these functions from the files. From there they run as callable functions on VMs as part of our ingestion pipeline and also have access to extensions like storage, caching, and logging. Overall, it looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When users upload apps to PostHog, these we import these functions from the files, and run them through [custom babel transforms](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/tree/master/plugin-server/src/worker/vm/transforms) for extra security. From there they run as callable functions on VMs as part of our ingestion pipeline and also have access to extensions like storage, caching, and logging. Overall, it looks like this:
```

![VM](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/vm.png)

Structuring apps this way provides flexibility to users while maintaining scalability and security. Added features like scheduling and exporting added new functionality users wanted. Caching and improving the config object (enabling statelessness) helped apps scale effectively. Running apps in VMs helped ensure they were secure and isolated. The next step was to put these apps into production.

## Serving apps and managing data at scale

An app is no good if it doesn't integrate into PostHog. Apps needed to integrate with our ingestion pipeline. They needed to handle an inflow of data, scale, manage tasks, and update themselves. There are many parts needed to make this happen.

> Below is a basic diagram of our ingestion pipeline. Most of what we care about is the plugin server and the Kafka data flow leading into it.

Reviewer: First time "plugin server" is mentioned". What's the difference between plugins and apps?

```mermaid
graph TD
    CLIENT[Client Library]
    DECIDE["/decide API"]
    CAPTURE[Capture API]
    PLUGINS[Plugin server]
    PERSONS["PostgreSQL (persons table)"]
    Kafka2[Kafka]

    CLIENT -..-> DECIDE

    CLIENT -..-> CAPTURE
    CAPTURE --> Kafka

    Kafka <-..- PLUGINS

    PLUGINS <--> PERSONS
    PLUGINS --> Kafka2

    Kafka2 <-..- ClickHouse
```

### Using Kafka and Redis

> Kafka manages our data flows. It helps us batch, split, and manage parallel work for our apps. For example, Kafka helps us batch and retry events when apps call `processEvent`. We use a Kafka topic (which holds messages and events in a logical order) to continue the flow of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka manages our data flows. It helps us batch, split, and manage parallel work for our apps. For example, Kafka helps us batch and retry events when apps call `processEvent`. We use a Kafka topic (fancy name for "queue") to continue the flow of data.
```

> Another service we use is Redis to cache data and back the queue for apps. Many parts of the app are reusable and don’t need to be rebuilt each time we run the app. There is data we only need to keep around temporarily. Using Redis to cache data like this dramatically improved app performance and lowered the number of app servers we needed to run.

Reviewer: > " back the queue for apps."

How? I'm not sure we do.

This line itself reads like "we use caching because caching is good", and is full of vague statements like "many parts of the app" (which ones?), "there is data we need around" (such as?), "data like this" (like what?), "increased app performance" (by how much?).

This reminds me of something from Amazon's rules of writing:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/53387/201756978-9dedd906-46f7-4236-86b6-d6816528bbdd.png)

Author: Rewrote to get specific example of what we cache in apps (organization details).

We also use a couple of Redis patterns. First, we use [Redlock](https://redis.io/docs/manual/patterns/distributed-locks/) for the scheduler and job queue consumer. Redlock ensures these processes are only run on one machine because we only want them to run once. If they ran more than once, we’d have duplication and issues. For example, we only need one scheduler to do the basic work of saying what to do at what time. Second, we use [Pub/Sub](https://redis.io/docs/manual/pubsub/) to check for updates to the apps.

We chose these because we used them elsewhere and they have a proven track record of working well at scale. They help the app server integrate with our existing infrastructure.

### Integrating into the plugin server

> To ensure apps connected to the rest of the ingestion pipeline, we decided to integrate apps into our plugin server. The plugin server runs processes for ingesting, formatting, and writing data from users to storage. It runs on Node (because of the decision we made in the hackathon about speed and VMs).

Reviewer: > we decided to integrate apps into our plugin server.

This is totally not true. Apps were called plugins, and the only thing the plugin server did was to run plugins on events. There was nothing to integrate apps into, as the server was built just to run them.

Later on we added "ingestion" (saving to clickhouse/postgres) to save the extra roundtrip back to Python.

> It runs on Node (because of the decision we made in the hackathon about speed and VMs).

We made the decision that we wanted to run custom JS. That required us to run some JS engine, and Node was the only real choice. We would have run `eval` if there was no other choices. Decisions about VMs and other details on how to implement this came after.

Author: Rewrote to get the evolution right.

> To show you how we did that, here’s a complete overview of what the plugin server looks like (our app server only utilizes some parts):

Reviewer: There's no separate "app server"

![Plugin server](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/plugin-server.png)

> The main thread routes incoming tasks to the right location. It receives data and starts threads to complete them. We decided to use [Piscina](https://github.com/piscinajs/piscina) (a node.js worker pool) to create and manage the threads. We choose Piscina because it abstracts away a lot of the management of threads we would need to do to scale. The main thread also handles the functionality of scheduling and job queuing. The result creates tasks and sends them to worker threads to complete.

Reviewer: > "We choose Piscina because it abstracts away a lot of the management of threads we would need to do to scale. "

This is low on detail. Every other similar tool "abstracts away details", so that's not saying much. Piscina did tick many more boxes compared to others, but I don't remember what all of them were.

### Doing the work (in worker threads)

Worker threads receive tasks from the main thread and execute them. Some of the tasks, like `processEvent` or `runEveryMinute` use the callable functions (app code) we detailed above. Worker threads contain the VMs, as well as the ingestion logic and connections to extensions and libraries. Each worker thread can run up to 10 tasks at the same time.

![Worker thread](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/worker-thread.png)

> When the worker thread finishes its task, it returns to the main thread for further processing. This could include more modification through apps, PostHog person processing, or writing to ClickHouse. A final `onEvent` task runs once all the processing completes, which is useful for functions like exporting or alerting.

Reviewer: The worker thread doesn't return to the main thread, the worker thread remains where it is. It will just get another new event from the main thread, when it has something to send.

> This could include more modification through apps, PostHog person processing, or writing to ClickHouse.

"more modification through apps" -- more modification of what? what is "person processing"?

Just say "takes the next event to process or other scheduled task"

> This structure enables modularity. Many different types of tasks, including app-related ones, can run together. Work improving the code for the plugin server improves all of the processes. This also lowers the maintenance needed for having multiple systems.

Reviewer: > Many different types of tasks, including app-related ones, can run together.

This is only at small scales. We're decoupling a lot of different types of workers/apps and running them separately for cloud.

> Work improving the code for the plugin server improves all of the processes.

This isn't really saying anything.

Second, users can write a loop that loops forever and causes resource exhaustion. To prevent this, we set up a babel plugin that injects code into `for`, `while`, and `do while` loops (as described in [this article](https://medium.com/@bvjebin/js-infinite-loops-killing-em-e1c2f5f2db7f)). Whenever there is a loop, we set up a timer before we start it. If the loop runs for more than 30 seconds, the program errors.

Third, to prevent data loss, we added the ability to retry logic to our `processEvent` function. Kafka handles retries for us by batching events and adding failed ones into the dead letter queue. We added the ability to run functions on `RetryError`  to improve consistency. App developers can also run fetches with retry. Here’s an example of what it looks like:

```js
import { RetryError } from '@posthog/plugin-scaffold'

export function setupPlugin() {
    try {
        // Some network connection
    } catch {
        throw new RetryError('Service is unavailable, but it might be back up in a moment')
    }
}
```

> Fourth, we made it easier to write high-quality apps. The biggest things we did here were creating an app [template](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-plugin-starter-kit) and [scaffold](https://github.com/PostHog/plugin-scaffold) for users, including [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) to test the app, and the ability to write the app in TypeScript. Many more minor improvements added up to higher-quality apps getting written.

Reviewer: This starter kit is quite out of date. It should at least be in TypeScript...

Also, what's "a scaffold"? How does one use it? The package you linked is some internal thing, which is used externally just for some TypeScript types

Author: Changed to docs, tutorials, TypeScript, and Jest. Scaffold now just linked as types, removed template.

---
date: 2022-11-07

> title: "How we built an app server (from MVP to billions of events)"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "How PostHog built an app server (from MVP to billions of events)"
```

Works a bit better for external sharing

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ["ian-vanagas", "marius-andra"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
categories: ["Inside PostHog"]
---

> As a product analytics and data tool company, we ingest and process billions of events to help companies understand their products and build better ones. PostHog has many tools to help them do this such as customizable event capture, client and server libraries, data insights, and more.
> 
> We are constantly trying to help users do more with their data, but sometimes we can't build the customized solution they need. In this case, we aim to give users the tools to build it themselves. At one point, this thinking led us to realize users needed the ability to customize data processing. Many users wanted to add geographic data to events, get events from CRMs, export data to BigQuery, and more. Use cases were endless, so we needed to give them the ability to do this themselves.
> 
> To do this, we needed to add the ability to build and use apps integrated into our data pipeline where users send their events. The apps had to run tasks, process and modify events, and connect to external services. Users needed to be able to customize their data flows, creating solutions to their endless use cases.
> 
> Like many features, building this started as a hackathon MVP and developed into a service that now handles billions of events. Here are how we built it and the lessons we learned along the way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PostHog's mission is to increase the number of successful products in the world. To achieve it, we're building a comprehensive [suite of analytics and data tools](/product) and we're only getting started – see [our roadmap](/roadmap) for a look at what we're working on now. 

Earlier in our timeline, users frequently asked us for ways to enrich or do more with their data. They wanted to add geographic data to events, get events from CRMs, export and import data from other sources, and plenty more besides. 

We couldn't build every solution ourselves, so we needed a solution that allowed PostHog users to customize their data flows, creating solutions to their endless use cases. We found the answer at our [insert location] offsite: an app platform that enabled users to build apps integrated into our data pipeline.

This is story behind how PostHog Apps went from three-day MVP into a service that handles billions of events – and all the lessons we learned along the way!
```

> ## The three-day app MVP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Part 1: The three-day MVP
```

> Apps started as an MVP that came together in 3 days. Marius created it to scratch his itch for a world map that existed in Google Analytics but didn’t in PostHog. The map required location data from IP addresses. There were many services to do this, but connecting them to event data going was difficult.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PostHog Apps is the brainchild of our [first ever hire](/blog/posthog-first-five), Marius Andra. Marius had an itch to scratch. He wanted to build a Google Analytic-style world map view for PostHog. The map required location data from IP addresses but, while there were many services to do this, connecting them to event data was difficult.
```

![Map](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/map.png)

> The idea expanded to enable more modification of the events pipeline such as backing up data to S3, syncing GitHub stars, or getting customer feedback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
His solution was the first ever PostHog app, [GeoIP](/apps/geoip-enrichment), but it soon expanded to enable more modification of the events pipeline, such as backing up data to S3, syncing GitHub stars, or getting customer feedback.
```

### Arbitrary app code in Python

The three-day hackathon led to the ability to write and run arbitrary Python code. It got downloaded from GitHub, extracted, and integrated into PostHog. It specifically required Python 3.9, because Python 3.8’s `zipimport` didn’t support the zip archives GitHub provides.

An app at this point looked like this:

```python
# exampleplugin/__init__.py
from posthog.plugins import PluginBaseClass, PosthogEvent, TeamPlugin
class ExamplePlugin(PluginBaseClass):   
    def __init__(self, team_plugin_config: TeamPlugin):
        super().__init__(team_plugin_config)
        # other per-team init code
    def process_event(self, event: PosthogEvent):
        event.properties["hello"] = "world"
        return event
    def process_identify(self, event: PosthogEvent):
        pass
```

Other features added included a plugin repository, an interface to configure the apps, and a CLI to preconfigure apps for custom installations. Marius built two sample plugins with it: the currency normalizer (convert event properties to a single currency), and the coveted GeoIP app.

> It didn’t take long for cracks to appear. First, it’s nearly impossible to manage Python dependencies via multiple `requirements.txt` files. There's no way to tell which dependencies your plugin's dependencies will install, without first installing them. There is [nothing like `pip --dry-run`](https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/53). You need to install the `pip` package and run an `__init__.py` script inside the package to get its dependency tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This was a promising start, but it didn’t take long for cracks to appear. 

First, it’s nearly impossible to manage Python dependencies via multiple `requirements.txt` files. There's no way to tell which dependencies your plugin's dependencies will install, without first installing them. There is [nothing like `pip --dry-run`](https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/53). You need to install the `pip` package and run an `__init__.py` script inside the package to get its dependency tree.
```

> What's more, all dependencies get installed together. This makes it just a matter of time before a plugin overrides an app dependency (e.g. `django`), and brings everything crashing down. This wasn’t going to work for us, so we needed to rebuild. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Second, all dependencies were installed together. This made it just a matter of time before a plugin overrode an app dependency (e.g. `django`), and brought everything crashing down. This wasn’t going to work for us, so we needed to rebuild. 
```

> ## Rebuilding in JavaScript

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Part 2: Rebuilding in JavaScript
```

> After deciding to rebuild, the first attempt was using [PyMiniRacer](https://github.com/sqreen/PyMiniRacer) to generate JavaScript. PyMiniRacer is great for simple functions, but lacked support for async/promises and importing modules like `fetch` because it was raw v8, not Node. It also had a limited standard library. All of which led to the decision it also wasn’t going to work. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After deciding to rebuild, the first attempt was using [PyMiniRacer](https://github.com/sqreen/PyMiniRacer) to generate JavaScript. PyMiniRacer is great for simple functions, but lacks support for async/promises and importing modules like `fetch` because it was raw v8, not Node. It also had a limited standard library. It wasn’t going to work. 
```

### Another try in JavaScript with gPRC in Node

> Marius also tried to develop and subsequently scratched a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/docs/languages/node/basics/) implementation in Node. He was able to call JS code from Python and get a response, but this approach left us with a lot of manual work. It raised questions such as "how many workers should respond to the gRPC calls?" and "how do we make sure we lose no events if the node gRPC server is down?” Apps needed to scale, so this also wasn’t going to work.

Reviewer 2: Removed the extra heading as both sections are quite short and having a head between them ruins the flow.

> ### Using Celery

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Finding the solution: Celery + virtual machines
```

> In our main PostHog app, we used [Celery](https://docs.celeryproject.org/) to process events asynchronously. When an event hits `/capture`, our API parses the request and queues the event into a job queue. Marius realized he could build a new server with the [Node port of Celery](https://celery-node.js.org/) and plug that in as another step in the existing pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After these false starts, Marius found a solution in something we already used: Celery.

In our main PostHog app, we use [Celery](https://docs.celeryproject.org/) to process events asynchronously. When an event hits `/capture`, our API parses the request and queues the event into a job queue. Marius realized he could build a new server with the [Node port of Celery](https://celery-node.js.org/) and plug that in as another step in the existing pipeline.
```

I'm assuming, possibly incorrectly, we still use Celery? Change back if not!

Author: We don't use celery anymore, so I reformatted to past tense.

> This would solve all pending issues: we wouldn't have to worry about Python dependencies, we could potentially run untrusted code in a fast sandbox, there would be no process management for a gRPC link, and we could eventually rewrite the entire ingestion pipeline in Node to get a speed boost over Python.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Celery solved all pending issues: we wouldn't have to worry about Python dependencies, we could potentially run untrusted code in a fast sandbox, there would be no process management for a gRPC link, and we could eventually rewrite the entire ingestion pipeline in Node to get a speed boost over Python.
```

> Using celery required us to build a Node app that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using Celery required us to build a Node app that:
```

- Gets a stream of events from Python through a Redis queue (via [celery.node](https://celery-node.js.org/))
- Runs user-defined JavaScript on that stream of events.
- Sends them back to Python through the same queue for ingestion.

The first and last steps were easy enough with our app structure and Celery, but we needed to make sure the arbitrary, user-defined JavaScript code was securely run. 

### VMs to the rescue

> The solution to the second step was to use VMs (Virtual Machines). Turns out Node. v14 has a [built-in VM module](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest-v17.x/api/vm.html) that enables running custom JavaScript in a separate context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The solution to the second step was to use VMs (Virtual Machines). Turns out Node v14 has a [built-in VM module](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest-v17.x/api/vm.html) that enables running custom JavaScript in a separate context.
```

> Using the VM module enabled us to run custom JavaScript code during event ingestion. The downside was that “the VM module is not a security mechanism. Do not use it to run untrusted code.” This wasn’t unexpected. [Privilege escalation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Privilege_escalation) and [resource exhaustion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_exhaustion_attack) attacks are real. We couldn’t avoid them, but we could build strategies to mitigate them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the VM module let us to run custom JavaScript code during event ingestion. The downside was that “the VM module is not a security mechanism. Do not use it to run untrusted code.” This wasn’t unexpected. [Privilege escalation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Privilege_escalation) and [resource exhaustion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_exhaustion_attack) attacks are real. We couldn’t avoid them, but we could build strategies to mitigate them.
```

Node's VM module puts your code in an isolated context, has ~~limited~~ no support for secure communications with the host, and has holes like this:

```js
const vm = require('vm');
vm.runInNewContext('this.constructor.constructor("return process")().exit()');
console.log('Never gets executed.');
```

Thus we needed an abstraction. The two most popular are `isolated-vm` and `vm2` :

> - [`isolated-vm`](https://github.com/laverdet/isolated-vm) claims to be secure and various big companies use it. Each "isolate" runs in a new thread, with controllable CPU and memory limits. There are methods to copy data between the main thread and an isolate, and we can share objects and functions between the host and the isolate. It's not a perfect sandbox, but it's as close as we can get.
> - [`vm2`](https://github.com/patriksimek/vm2) has a different isolation model. Each "VM" runs in an isolated NodeVM context, in the same thread as the rest of the app. There are no memory or CPU limits we can enforce. You run the code locally, but don’t share any variables with the host app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`isolated-vm`](https://github.com/laverdet/isolated-vm) claims to be secure and various big companies use it. Each "isolate" runs in a new thread, with controllable CPU and memory limits. There are methods to copy data between the main thread and an isolate, and we can share objects and functions between the host and the isolate. It's not a perfect sandbox, but it's as close as we can get.

- [`vm2`](https://github.com/patriksimek/vm2) has a different isolation model. Each "VM" runs in an isolated NodeVM context, in the same thread as the rest of the app. There are no memory or CPU limits we can enforce. You run the code locally, but don’t share any variables with the host app.
```

While `isolated-vm` felt like a great fit because of its emphasis on security, its implementation [wasn't a success](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/6855#issuecomment-853879421).

> > At the end of the day, I (Marius) would have had to implement some proxying code similar to vm2, just to get fetch working, and decided it's not worth the effort, considering the time budget and the extremely likely case that I'll leave in some security holes.

Reviewer 2: Is this definitely needed? Kind of disrupts the flow. Could maybe do a footnote instead, or incorporate into the copy?

`vm2` didn't have this problem, as it had its own system of proxies that make sharing code between the host and the VM seamless.

Because of this, we decided to change our security model. On PostHog Cloud, we would vet the apps ourselves, before allowing everyone to use them. Self-hosted users were free to write and use as many [arbitrary apps](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/6855) as they please.

> This maintains self-hosted users’ freedom, while still enabling Cloud users to benefit from community apps. Apps are all developed and tested in the open. We just need to do a final manual check before installing them. After launch, we found many of [our most used apps](/blog/the-state-of-plugins) came from our community, proving this decision’s success.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This maintained self-hosted users’ freedom, while still enabling Cloud users to benefit from community apps. Apps are all developed and tested in the open. We just need to do a final manual check before installing them. After launch, we found many of [our most used apps](/blog/the-state-of-plugins) came from our community, proving this decision’s success.
```

### What did we learn from all this?

> - Python, which we wrote our ingestion pipeline in, wasn’t going to work. Dependency management was too difficult.
> - Apps needed to scale while having access to some key JavaScript libraries. Using Node and Celery enabled us to integrate into our ingestion pipeline while providing the functionality we needed.
> - We needed to make sure the code apps were running was secure and sandboxed. VMs were the answer to this, and Node had support for VMs.
> - The default NodeVM wasn’t secure and couldn’t communicate with a host. `isolated-vm` was secure but needed proxying. `vm2` had the ability to proxy code, but was less secure. `vm2` and a review process for Cloud apps was the ultimate decision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Python, which we wrote our ingestion pipeline in, wasn’t going to work. Dependency management was too difficult.
- Apps needed to scale while having access to some key JavaScript libraries. Using Node and Celery enabled us to integrate into our ingestion pipeline while providing the functionality we needed.

- We needed to make sure the code apps were running was secure and sandboxed. VMs were the answer to this, and Node had support for VMs.

- The default NodeVM wasn’t secure and couldn’t communicate with a host. `isolated-vm` was secure but needed proxying. `vm2` had the ability to proxy code, but was less secure. `vm2` and a review process for Cloud apps was the ultimate decision.
```

These learnings led to our current app structure.

> ## Evolving to the current app structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Part 3: Building a mature app platform that scales
```

> After creating a basic MVP, and seeing the benefits of its usage, work continued on apps. They evolved and functionality grew over time. Where did they end up? Apps structure and features follow. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After creating a basic MVP, and seeing the benefits of its usage, work continued to add functionality and support greater scale. 

Before we get any deeper, it's worth recapping apps structure and features as they are now. 
```

> ### Structuring apps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### App structure
```

The basic structure of an app has stayed the same since the JavaScript rebuild. Each app contains two key files:

> - `index.js` (or `index.ts`) which contains key application logic, modifies events, connects with external services, and interacts with PostHog. It has an allowlist of libraries to use for utilities or interacting with other services. It also has access (through the VM) to meta information, storage, and logging.
> - `plugin.json` contains configuration data for the app, what shows up in PostHog, and variables for end users to modify. The file contains the name, description, and other details that show up on the front end.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `index.js` (or `index.ts`) which contains key application logic, modifies events, connects with external services, and interacts with PostHog. It has an allowlist of libraries to use for utilities or interacting with other services. It also has access (through the VM) to meta information, storage, and logging.

- `plugin.json` contains configuration data for the app, what shows up in PostHog, and variables for end users to modify. The file contains the name, description, and other details that show up on the front end.
```

    - useful for triggering events based on updates to external services such as Stripe, HubSpot, or GitHub.
- once processing is complete (`exportEvents`, `onEvent`)
    - useful for exporting data to external services such as BigQuery, Snowflake, or Databricks.

When users upload apps to PostHog, we import these functions from the files and run them through [custom babel transforms](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/tree/master/plugin-server/src/worker/vm/transforms) for extra security. From there they run as callable functions on VMs as part of our ingestion pipeline and also have access to extensions like storage, caching, and logging. Overall, it looks like this:

![VM](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/vm.png)

Structuring apps this way provides flexibility to users while maintaining scalability and security. Added features like scheduling and exporting added new functionality users wanted. Caching and improving the config object (enabling statelessness) helped apps scale effectively. Running apps in VMs helped ensure they were secure and isolated. The next step was to put these apps into production.

> ## Serving apps and managing data at scale

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Serving apps and managing data at scale
```

The initial ingestion pipeline used Python, Celery to manage the job queue, and a Node "plugin server" that ran the functions from the apps on incoming events.

It has evolved significantly. A high-level version now looks like this:

```mermaid
graph TD
    CLIENT[Client Library]
    DECIDE["/decide API"]
    CAPTURE[Capture API]
    PLUGINS[Plugin server]
    PERSONS["PostgreSQL (persons table)"]
    Kafka2[Kafka]

    CLIENT -..-> DECIDE

    CLIENT -..-> CAPTURE
    CAPTURE --> Kafka

    Kafka <-..- PLUGINS

    PLUGINS <--> PERSONS
    PLUGINS --> Kafka2

    Kafka2 <-..- ClickHouse
```

The plugin server is now a core service that processes all events, updates related, models, and runs all plugins (including apps). Apps are just a portion of what the app server does. 

The entire pipeline is now written in TypeScript and runs on Node. This saves sending processed data back to Python for writing to databases. We can just write it directly to ClickHouse or Postgres. We also now use Kafka to manage data flows and Redis for caching.

> ### Using Kafka and Redis

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Using Kafka and Redis
```

Another service we use is Redis to cache data for apps. Parts of the app are reusable and don’t need to be recomputed each time we run the app. For example, apps can cache details about the organization events belong to, instead of looking for those details each time an event is processed. Over billions of events, this is a lot of compute we save.

We use a couple of Redis patterns. First, we use [Redlock](https://redis.io/docs/manual/patterns/distributed-locks/) for the scheduler and job queue consumer. Redlock ensures these processes are only run on one machine because we only want them to run once. If they ran more than once, we’d have duplication and issues. For example, we only need one scheduler to do the basic work of saying what to do at what time. Second, we use [Pub/Sub](https://redis.io/docs/manual/pubsub/) to check for updates to the apps.

We chose these because we used them elsewhere and they have a proven track record of working well at scale. They help apps integrate with our existing infrastructure.

> ### How the plugin server works (apps and beyond)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### How the plugin server works (apps and beyond)
```

As mentioned earlier, our plugin server expanded to encompass much more than apps. It now handles all plugins, including apps which validate, process, format, and write event data to databases. The plugin server looks like this: 

![Plugin server](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/plugin-server.png)

The main thread routes incoming tasks to the right location. It receives data and starts threads to complete them. We use [Piscina](https://github.com/piscinajs/piscina) (a node.js worker pool) to create and manage the threads. Piscina abstracts away a lot of the management of threads we would need to do to scale. The main thread also handles the functionality of scheduling and job queuing. The result creates tasks and sends them to worker threads to complete.

> ### Doing the work (in worker threads)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Doing the work (in worker threads)
```

Worker threads receive tasks from the main thread and execute them. Some of the tasks, like `processEvent` or `runEveryMinute` use the callable functions (app code) we detailed above. Worker threads contain the VMs, as well as the ingestion logic and connections to extensions and libraries. Each worker thread can run up to 10 tasks at the same time.

![Worker thread](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/worker-thread.png)

When the worker thread finishes its task, it gets another new event, process, or other scheduled task from the main thread. The main thread is responsible for getting and rerouting events for further processing. A final `onEvent` task runs once all the processing completes, which is useful for functions like exporting or alerting.

This structure enables modularity, allowing us to run different types of workers and apps. On the small scale, they can run individual app tasks can together. On a larger scale, we are working on decoupling types of tasks to enable them separately and more efficiently.

> ## Making sure arbitrary code doesn’t break everything

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Making sure arbitrary code doesn’t break everything
```

> ## Making sure arbitrary code doesn’t break everything

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Making sure arbitrary code doesn’t break everything
```

```js
import { RetryError } from '@posthog/plugin-scaffold'

export function setupPlugin() {
    try {
        // Some network connection
    } catch {
        throw new RetryError('Service is unavailable, but it might be back up in a moment')
    }
}
```

Fourth, we made it easier to write high-quality apps. We improved the [docs](/docs/apps/build), and added [tutorials](/docs/apps/build/tutorial). Apps are written in Typescript (we provide [types](/docs/apps/build/types)) and tested in [Jest](/docs/apps/build/testing). Many more minor improvements added up to higher-quality apps getting written.

Finally, as mentioned before, although our self-hosted instances can run whatever arbitrary code they want, we still review apps before adding them for everyone to use on Cloud. This ensures a final quality and security standard for users.

All this work helped us create more secure and reliable apps. This allowed us to be more confident in allowing users to build apps and users to be more confident using them.

## Unlocking customization and innovation through apps

> We’ve seen users large and small write apps for all sorts of use cases. There are large companies writing apps to enhance events with critical data. There are also solo devs writing apps to scratch their own itch and end up used by thousands in our community. Users write often write apps to connect or export to key services in their stack. Some examples of apps include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PostHog Apps have some a long way from the original three-day MVP. Now, large companies are writing apps to enhance events with critical data, and solo devs are writing apps that are used by thousands in our community.

Some examples of community-built apps include:
```

> - "Data-in" apps like the [Hubspot](/apps/hubspot-connector), [Salesforce](/apps/salesforce-connector) (community built), [Stripe](https://github.com/PostHog/stripe-plugin), and [Shopify](/apps/shopify) connectors.
> - "Data-out" apps like the [BigQuery](/apps/bigquery-export), [S3](/apps/s3-export), and [Rudderstack](/apps/snowflake-export) (community built) exports.
> - Ingestion-filtering apps like [Property Filter](/apps/property-filter) (community built), [Property Flattener](/apps/property-flattener), and [First Time Event Tracker](/apps/first-time-event-tracker).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "Data-in" apps like the [Hubspot](/apps/hubspot-connector), [Salesforce](/apps/salesforce-connector) (community built), [Stripe](https://github.com/PostHog/stripe-plugin), and [Shopify](/apps/shopify) connectors.

- "Data-out" apps like the [BigQuery](/apps/bigquery-export), [S3](/apps/s3-export), and [Rudderstack](/apps/snowflake-export) (community built) exports.

- Ingestion-filtering apps like [Property Filter](/apps/property-filter) (community built), [Property Flattener](/apps/property-flattener), and [First Time Event Tracker](/apps/first-time-event-tracker).
```

        event.properties["hello"] = "world"
        return event
    def process_identify(self, event: PosthogEvent):
        pass
```

Other features added included a plugin repository, an interface to configure the apps, and a CLI to preconfigure apps for custom installations. Marius built two sample apps with it: the [currency normalizer](/apps/currency-normalization) (convert event properties to a single currency), and the coveted GeoIP app.

This was a promising start, but it didn’t take long for cracks to appear. 

First, it’s nearly impossible to manage Python dependencies via multiple `requirements.txt` files. There's no way to tell which dependencies your plugin's dependencies will install, without first installing them. There is [nothing like `pip --dry-run`](https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/53). You need to install the `pip` package and run an `__init__.py` script inside the package to get its dependency tree.

Second, all dependencies were installed together. This made it just a matter of time before a plugin overrode an app dependency (e.g. `django`), and brought everything crashing down. This wasn’t going to work for us, so we needed to rebuild. 

> ## Part 2: Rebuilding in JavaScript

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 🛠 Part 2: Rebuilding in JavaScript
```

Reviewer 2: I think adding emojis to each of the major sections will help signpost them a bit more

This maintained self-hosted users’ freedom, while still enabling Cloud users to benefit from community apps. Apps are all developed and tested in the open. We just need to do a final manual check before installing them. After launch, we found many of [our most used apps](/blog/the-state-of-plugins) came from our community, proving this decision’s success.

### What did we learn from all this?

- Python, which we wrote our ingestion pipeline in, wasn’t going to work for apps. Dependency management for arbitrary code was too difficult.

- Apps needed to scale while having access to some key JavaScript libraries. Using Node and Celery enabled us to integrate into our ingestion pipeline while providing the functionality we needed.

- We needed to make sure the code apps were running was secure and sandboxed. VMs were the answer to this, and Node had support for VMs.

- The default NodeVM wasn’t secure and couldn’t communicate with a host. `isolated-vm` was secure but needed proxying. `vm2` had the ability to proxy code, but was less secure. `vm2` and a review process for Cloud apps was the ultimate decision.

These learnings led to our current app structure.

> ## Part 3: Building a mature app platform that scales

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 📈 Part 3: Building a mature app platform that scales
```

```js
import { RetryError } from '@posthog/plugin-scaffold'

export function setupPlugin() {
    try {
        // Some network connection
    } catch {
        throw new RetryError('Service is unavailable, but it might be back up in a moment')
    }
}
```

Fourth, we made it easier to write high-quality apps. We improved the [docs](/docs/apps/build) and added [tutorials](/docs/apps/build/tutorial). Apps were rewritten to use Typescript (we provide [types](/docs/apps/build/types)) and tested in [Jest](/docs/apps/build/testing). Many more minor improvements added up to higher-quality apps getting created.

Finally, as mentioned before, although our self-hosted instances can run whatever arbitrary code they want, we still review apps before adding them for everyone to use on Cloud. This ensures a final quality and security standard for users.

All this work helped us create more secure and reliable apps. This allowed us to be more confident in allowing users to build apps and users to be more confident using them.

> ## Unlocking customization and control through apps
> 
> We’ve seen users large and small write apps for all sorts of use cases. There are large companies writing apps to enhance events with critical data. There are also solo devs writing apps to scratch their own itch and end up used by thousands in our community. Users write often write apps to connect or export to key services in their stack. Some examples of apps include:
> 
> - "Data-in" apps like the [Hubspot](/apps/hubspot-connector), [Salesforce](/apps/salesforce-connector) (community built), [Stripe](https://github.com/PostHog/stripe-plugin), and [Shopify](/apps/shopify) connectors.
> 
> - "Data-out" apps like the [BigQuery](/apps/bigquery-export), [S3](/apps/s3-export), and [Rudderstack](/apps/rudderstack-export) (community built) exports.
> 
> - Ingestion-filtering apps like [Property Filter](/apps/property-filter) (community built), [Property Flattener](/apps/property-flattener), and [First Time Event Tracker](/apps/first-time-event-tracker).
> 
> Apps unlocked more control over data flows on the PostHog platform. Users install and enable thousands of apps each month, which process billions of events in our pipeline. They use them to connect and shape their data to their needs.
> 
> Building and scaling apps fundamentally changed the way we think about our product and infrastructure. Work on apps helped our ingestion pipeline become more integrated and modular. The plugin server, now a core part of our ingestion pipeline, evolved out of the app MVP.
> 
> Our vision for apps is to continue to enable more customizability for data flows. We want users to have access to the data they need to create better products, and apps are key to doing this. We also want to allow for more customization of the overall PostHog experience. As an example of this, see the release of [site apps](/tutorials/build-site-app), which provides similar customizable functionality in the frontend.
> 
> The ability to leverage PostHog to customize, control, and fully utilize your data will continue to improve. Apps, and many other features of PostHog, help with this. In the end, PostHog aims to help you understand your product and gives you the tools to build a better one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Unlocking customization and control through apps

Building and scaling PostHog apps fundamentally changed the way we think about our product and infrastructure. We started life as an open source product analytics tool. Now, we're a platform. 

Since launch, we've seen companies and solo devs create numerous useful, clever apps to solve problems or connect new services. There are [over 50 PostHog apps](/apps), including:

- "Data-in" apps connecting PostHog to [Hubspot](/apps/hubspot-connector), [Salesforce](/apps/salesforce-connector) (community built), [Stripe](https://github.com/PostHog/stripe-plugin), and [Shopify](/apps/shopify).

- "Data-out" apps for exporting PostHog data to [BigQuery](/apps/bigquery-export), [S3](/apps/s3-export), [Rudderstack](/apps/rudderstack-export) (community built), and [Intercom](/apps/intercom).

- Ingestion-filtering apps like [Property Filter](/apps/property-filter) (community built), [Property Flattener](/apps/property-flattener), and [First Time Event Tracker](/apps/first-time-event-tracker) that give users even more control over events and properties sent to PostHog.

Our vision for apps is to continue to enable more customizability for data flows. We want users to have access to the data they need to create better products, and apps are key to doing this. 

We also want to allow for more customization of the overall PostHog experience. As an example of this, see the release of [site apps](/tutorials/build-site-app), which provides similar customizable functionality in the frontend.

The ability to leverage PostHog to customize, control, and fully utilize your data will continue to improve. Apps, and many other features of PostHog, help with this. In the end, PostHog aims to help you understand your product and gives you the tools to build a better one.
```

Reviewer 2: @ivanagas Tweaked a little, but I still think everything after "Our vision" could with "something..." – I appreciate this isn't especially useful feedback!

Perhaps @mariusandra or @jamesefhawkins could input here? I'd like this piece to end with a tight, defined statement on how apps are central to PostHog's wider product vision. 

Also, could we expand a tiny bit more on site apps than just linking to the tutorial? (This might be too much to fit in.)

Author: Added a piece on site apps.

---

> date: 2022-11-07

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2022-11-21
```

class ExamplePlugin(PluginBaseClass):   
    def __init__(self, team_plugin_config: TeamPlugin):
        super().__init__(team_plugin_config)
        # other per-team init code
    def process_event(self, event: PosthogEvent):
        event.properties["hello"] = "world"
        return event
    def process_identify(self, event: PosthogEvent):
        pass
```

Other features added included a plugin repository, an interface to configure the apps, and a CLI to preconfigure apps for custom installations. Marius built two sample apps with it: the [currency normalizer](/apps/currency-normalization) (convert event properties to a single currency), and the coveted GeoIP app.

This was a promising start, but it didn’t take long for cracks to appear. 

First, it’s nearly impossible to manage Python dependencies via multiple `requirements.txt` files. There's no way to tell which dependencies your plugin's dependencies will install, without first installing them. There is [nothing like `pip --dry-run`](https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/53). You need to install the `pip` package and run an `__init__.py` script inside the package to get its dependency tree.

> Second, all the dependencies installed together. This made it just a matter of time before a plugin overrode an app dependency (e.g. `django`), and brought everything crashing down. This wasn’t going to work for us, so we needed to rebuild. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, all the dependencies are installed together. This made it just a matter of time before a plugin overrode an app dependency (e.g. `django`), and brought everything crashing down. This wasn’t going to work for us, so we needed to rebuild. 
```

These learnings led to our current app structure.

## 📈 Part 3: Building a mature app platform that scales

After creating a basic MVP, and seeing the benefits of its usage, work continued to add functionality and support greater scale. 

Before we get any deeper, it's worth recapping the structure and features of apps as they are now. 

### App structure

The basic structure of an app has stayed the same since the JavaScript rebuild. Each app contains two key files:

- `index.js` (or `index.ts`) which contains key application logic, modifies events, connects with external services, and interacts with PostHog. It has an allowlist of libraries to use for utilities or interacting with other services. It also has access (through the VM) to meta information, storage, and logging.

- `plugin.json` contains configuration data for the app, what shows up in PostHog, and variables for end users to modify. The file contains the name, description, and other details that show up on the front end.

Here’s what a basic `index.js` looks like:

> ```js
> // Some internal library function
> async function getRandomNumber() {
>     return 4
> }
> 
> // Plugin method that runs on plugin load
> async function setupPlugin({ config }) {
>     console.log(config.greeting)
> }
> 
> // Plugin method that processes event
> async function processEvent(event, { config, cache }) {
>     const counterValue = (await cache.get('greeting_counter', 0))
>     cache.set('greeting_counter', counterValue + 1)
>     if (!event.properties) event.properties = {}
>     event.properties['greeting'] = config.greeting
>     event.properties['greeting_counter'] = counterValue
>     event.properties['random_number'] = await getRandomNumber()
>     return event
> }
> 
> // The plugin itself
> module.exports = {
>     setupPlugin,
>     processEvent
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
// Some internal library function
async function getRandomNumber() {
    return 4
}

// Plugin method that runs on plugin load
export async function setupPlugin({ config }) {
    console.log(config.greeting)
}

// Plugin method that processes event
export async function processEvent(event, { config, cache }) {
    const counterValue = (await cache.get('greeting_counter', 0))
    cache.set('greeting_counter', counterValue + 1)
    if (!event.properties) event.properties = {}
    event.properties['greeting'] = config.greeting
    event.properties['greeting_counter'] = counterValue
    event.properties['random_number'] = await getRandomNumber()
    return event
}
```
```

Changed `module.exports` to `export` in front of both `setupPlugin` and `processEvent`

![Worker thread](../images/blog/how-we-built-an-app-server/worker-thread.png)

When the worker thread finishes its task, it gets another new event, process, or other scheduled task from the main thread. The main thread handles getting and rerouting events for further processing. A final `onEvent` task runs once all the processing completes, which is useful for functions like exporting or alerting.

This structure enables modularity, allowing us to run different types of workers and apps. On the small scale, workers can run individual app tasks can together. On a larger scale, we are working on decoupling types of tasks to improve efficiency.

### Making sure arbitrary code doesn’t break everything

The final piece of the story of apps to worry about is that they are arbitrary code. When left unchecked, they can run whatever code they want, including code that tries to exploit or crash our servers. 

> Allowing users to run arbitrary code can cause many security, infrastructure, and usability issues. We use VMs because they provide some solutions, but they don't offer total protection. We've done a bunch more work to prevent potential issues and make sure apps are secure and reliable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allowing users to run arbitrary code can cause many security, infrastructure, and usability issues. We use Node VMs because they provide some solutions, but they don't offer total protection. We've done a bunch more work to prevent potential issues and make sure apps are secure and reliable.
```

Just saying "VM" aka "Virtual Machine" might make people understand something different.

```js
import { RetryError } from '@posthog/plugin-scaffold'

export function setupPlugin() {
    try {
        // Some network connection
    } catch {
        throw new RetryError('Service is unavailable, but it might be back up in a moment')
    }
}
```

Fourth, we made it easier to write high-quality apps. We improved the [docs](/docs/apps/build) and added [tutorials](/docs/apps/build/tutorial). Apps were rewritten to use Typescript (we provide [types](/docs/apps/build/types)) and tested in [Jest](/docs/apps/build/testing). Many more minor improvements added up to higher-quality apps getting created.

Finally, as mentioned before, although our self-hosted instances can run whatever arbitrary code they want, we still review apps before adding them for everyone to use on Cloud. This ensures a final quality and security standard for users.

All this work helped us create more secure and reliable apps. This allowed us to be more confident in allowing users to build apps and users to be more confident using them.

> ## Unlocking customization and control through apps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 🏆 Conclusion: The present and future of PostHog apps
```
